README.md, before:

# Whitaker's Words

## Project history

`whitakers_words` is a port of William Whitaker's original Ada code to Python 3 for future maintenance and improvement.
You can find the current state of development that started with the original Whitaker's Words, written in Ada, on
[Martin Keegan's Github repository](https://github.com/mk270/whitakers-words).
More information about William Whitaker and the Words program is available there.  

## Changes since fork

This specific project is a repurposed fork of the initial effort by [Luke Hollis](https://github.com/ArchimedesDigital/open_words).
While the project looks very different on the surface, it still uses many parts of the original algorithm.
A number of (proposed) functions have been deleted:

* the promise of english-to-latin lookups has been abandoned
* multi-word lookups are no longer possible

It has also seen significant improvement in usability and performance:

* `format_data` has been renamed to `datagenerator`. It is now a data feeding program which reads Whitaker's file lists into Python dictionaries and lists
* `datagenerator` logic is called upon installation of the project, through `python setup.py install` or `pip install .`
* inefficient dictionary loops (`O(n)`) have been replaced by lookups (`O(log n)`)
* the default output is no longer a JSON dictionary, but rather a hierarchy of Python objects.
* tests were added

## Project status

This project is far from production-ready. Known issues are:

* `prefixes.py` and `suffixes.py` are not being used in program logic right now
* the API does not yet support filtering for e.g. pre-classical inflections
* question words are analyzed terribly wrong

There are certainly many more major problems to be found. Feel free to create Github issues for any error you encounter.

## License

This project is under the MIT license. The license was taken over from the
[Luke Hollis project](https://github.com/ArchimedesDigital/open_words).
The original Whitaker's Words project in Ada had a very 'liberal' license that was ostensibly written by William Whitaker himself;
the canonical MIT license seems to be quite close to the intent Mr. Whitaker had.

# Usage

## Install instructions

The prerequisites are simple: have python 3.9 installed with pip.

If you have cloned the repository, you can just use

    $ python setup.py install

Otherwise, you will need to install from the Github repo, because there is no PyPi package for this project.

    $ pip install git+https://github.com/blagae/whitakers_words.git#egg=whitakers_words

If you have a requirements file, then this is a valid format for the dependency:

    git+git://github.com/blagae/whitakers_words.git#egg=whitakers_words

## Usage as a library in Python code

To use the standard dictionary lookup, use the `Parser` class as follows:

```
from whitakers_words.parser import Parser
parser = Parser()
result = parser.parse("regemque")
```

The resulting value is a `Word` object, structured as follows:

```
Word:
  text: regemque
  forms:
    - enclitic: que
      analyses:
        - lexeme: (rex, regis)
          inflections:
            - root: reg
              affix: em (Accusative Singular Common)
          enclitic: que
```

## Command line tool

Since version 0.5, a command line tool called `whitaker` is available when you install the project.
It can be called as follows:

```
$ whitaker parse regemque
```

Some caveats when using this tool, as of version 0.5:

* the tool is very basic and does not support a lot of options yet.
* the output of the tool is simply the `repr()` in the Python code.
* it is not guaranteed that the subcommands will remain the same.

# Development

## virtual environment

You are advised to use `virtualenv` or `venv` when modifying any code. The project currently runs on Python 3.9,
using some improvements of the type hinting system, but it could probably run on older versions as well with minimal modifications.

The folder `venv/` is ignored by the git config, so this is the suggested name for your venv:

    $ python -m venv venv/

## Test instructions

The tests use the `pytest` framework. All tests are in the `tests` module (which is not included in the distribution).
You should be able to run the tests from the command line, without any further config, by just calling:

    $ pytest tests

## Using tox

If you want to run the full QA check of this project, just run tox on the command line while `venv` is active

    $ tox

This commands runs the tests with `pytest`, checks for PEP8 compliance with `flake8`, and for type hinting consistency with `mypy`.

## Project metadata

* The program logic is detailed [here](./project_structure.md). Since the project is in flux, some details may be out of date at any given time.
* There are a number of TODO items throughout the code base, but I'll also try and keep the [TODO](./TODO.md) file up to date with more high-level items.

## Roadmap

* Improve current state of project
* Leverage all information in the `DICTLINE.GEN` file
* Compare results to output of the original Whitaker's Words program
* Output to different formats: JSON, YAML, Whitaker's original syntax, ...
* ...

Commit message:

Use dict.values() unless the key is also necessary

README.md, after:

# Whitaker's Words

## Project history

`whitakers_words` is a port of William Whitaker's original Ada code to Python 3 for future maintenance and improvement.
You can find the current state of development that started with the original Whitaker's Words, written in Ada, on
[Martin Keegan's Github repository](https://github.com/mk270/whitakers-words).
More information about William Whitaker and the Words program is available there.  

## Changes since fork

This specific project is a repurposed fork of the initial effort by [Luke Hollis](https://github.com/ArchimedesDigital/open_words).
While the project looks very different on the surface, it still uses many parts of the original algorithm.
A number of (proposed) functions have been deleted:

* the promise of english-to-latin lookups has been abandoned
* multi-word lookups are no longer possible

It has also seen significant improvement in usability and performance:

* `format_data` has been renamed to `datagenerator`. It is now a data feeding program which reads Whitaker's file lists into Python dictionaries and lists
* `datagenerator` logic is called upon installation of the project, through `python setup.py install` or `pip install .`
* inefficient dictionary loops (`O(n)`) have been replaced by lookups (`O(log n)`)
* the default output is no longer a JSON dictionary, but rather a hierarchy of Python objects.
* tests were added

## Project status

This project is far from production-ready. Known issues are:

* `prefixes.py` and `suffixes.py` are not being used in program logic right now
* the API does not yet support filtering for e.g. pre-classical inflections
* interrogative pronouns are analyzed terribly wrong

There are certainly many more major problems to be found. Feel free to create Github issues for any error you encounter.

## License

This project is under the MIT license. The license was taken over from the
[Luke Hollis project](https://github.com/ArchimedesDigital/open_words).
The original Whitaker's Words project in Ada had a very 'liberal' license that was ostensibly written by William Whitaker himself;
the canonical MIT license seems to be quite close to the intent Mr. Whitaker had.

# Usage

## Install instructions

The prerequisites are simple: have python 3.9 installed with pip.

If you have cloned the repository, you can just use either one of these options:

    $ python setup.py install

    $ pip install .

Otherwise, you will need to install from the Github repo, because there is no PyPi package for this project.

    $ pip install git+https://github.com/blagae/whitakers_words.git#egg=whitakers_words

If you want to use whitakers_words as a dependency, then this is a valid format for adding the project to `requirements.txt`:

    git+git://github.com/blagae/whitakers_words.git#egg=whitakers_words

## Usage as a library in Python code

To use the standard dictionary lookup, use the `Parser` class as follows:

```
from whitakers_words.parser import Parser
parser = Parser()
result = parser.parse("regemque")
```

The resulting value is a `Word` object, structured as follows:

```
Word:
  text: regemque
  forms:
    - enclitic: que
      analyses:
        - lexeme: (rex, regis)
          inflections:
            - root: reg
              affix: em (Accusative Singular Common)
          enclitic: que
```

## Command line tool

Since version 0.5, a command line tool called `whitaker` is available when you install the project.
It can be called as follows:

    $ whitaker parse regemque --format=yaml

Some caveats when using this tool, as of version 0.5:

* the tool is very basic and does not support a lot of options yet.
* it is not guaranteed that the subcommands will remain the same.

It also supports the original `words` format. Note that as of yet, it is not fully equivalent to the original WORDS program.

    $ whitaker words regemque
    que                  TACKON
    -que = and (enclitic, translated before attached word); completes plerus/uter;
    reg.em               N      3 1 ACC S M

    king


# Development

## virtual environment

You are advised to use `virtualenv` or `venv` when modifying any code. The project currently runs on Python 3.9,
using some improvements of the type hinting system, but it could probably run on older versions as well with minimal modifications.

The folder `venv/` is ignored by the git config, so this is the suggested name for your venv:

    $ python -m venv venv/

## Test instructions

The tests use the `pytest` framework. All tests are in the `tests` module (which is not included in the distribution).
You should be able to run the tests from the command line, from the root folder of the project and without any further config, by just calling:

    $ pytest tests

If that doesn't work, you may need to manually install the project dependencies before:

    $ pip install -r requirements.txt

## Using tox

If you want to run the full QA check of this project, just run tox on the command line while `venv` is active

    $ tox

This commands runs the tests with `pytest`, checks for PEP8 compliance with `flake8`, and for type hinting consistency with `mypy`.

## Project metadata

* The program logic is detailed [here](./project_structure.md). Since the project is in flux, some details may be out of date at any given time.
* There are a number of TODO items throughout the code base, but I'll also try and keep the [TODO](./TODO.md) file up to date with more high-level items.

## Roadmap

* Improve current state of project
* Leverage all information in the `DICTLINE.GEN` file
* Compare results to output of the original Whitaker's Words program
* Output to different formats: JSON, YAML, Whitaker's original syntax, ...
* ...
